---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Category Theory, 3: Natural Transformations"
date:   2019-08-24 00:56:11 -0400
categories: CAT Math
---

## Natural Transformation are arrows of arrows
Or more explicitly, natural transformations are the arrows in the category where objects are functors.

Can you guess the definition of natural transformation? 

If not, do you remember the definition of the arrow category? 


## Monic components induce monic natural transformation
It is a very trivial part but I want to go through the details of this proof.

#### Aside: Preserve Semantic in Programming Language


## Sketches are just "formal signatures".

Maybe "formal signature" is a bit confusing. It is just how "language" and "theory" is to "first order logic".  I can take an example to elaborate that. When the author wants to prove something in category theory or express the structure of some categories, the author would choose to draw a diagram, a graph in the book to illustrate. However, sketch is the formalilzation of these aids (these graphs). These aids, once was a part of meta-language and acceptable to be a little informal and now becomes a mathematical object. I won't go into the details of the theories of sketches because (1). it is itself very abstract and thus time consuming to understand, (2) when a new object is introduced there are tons of new congruences needed to verify, which is again very time-consuming, (3) I feel a little too vague working on those mathematical objects:
>   A model of the underlying linear sketch $E$ in some category $C$ is the same as a functor on the original category: on the one hand, any functor takes any commutative diagram to a commutative diagram and so is a model ...

This is a part from *Barr and Wells*, which I find not satisfactory because it is a little too informal for me.

I won't go into details about sketches because my ultimate goal of category studying has becoming categorical semantic of type theory.




## Mix-Notation: Natural Transformation + Functors


## 2-Cat

