---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Homotopy Type Theory, 0"
date:   2019-10-31 00:56:11 -0400
categories: Math HoTT
---
# IN CONSTRUCTION

Note that, we will start off with introduction of homotopy theory. Since I haven't been exposed to topology, that would be very interesting.

The current target is to understand P78,79 of the HoTT Book completely.

***

I think we need to recall some topology concepts here, because the audience might be pure computer science student who can only manipulate axiom and $Proof$ and syntax terms.

***

Given a topology $X$

Recall
> A **path** between $a, b \in X$ is a *continuous* function $f: [0,1] \rightarrow X$

Continuous is something only topology can define.

A path $p$ has inverse $p^{-1}$, and two paths $p \centerdot q$ can concatenate to another path.

> $Proof$: A concatenation of two path (continuous) functions lead to another path (continuous function).

Now we can define homotopy.

> Given $X_ 1, X_ 2$, a **homotopy** between two *continuous* functions $p, q: X_ 1 \rightarrow X_ 2$ 
> is a continuous function $H : X_ 1 \times [0,1] \rightarrow X_2$ s.t.
>  
> $H(x,0) = p(x)$ and $H(x,1) = q(x) \ \  \forall x$
> 
> What's more, if there is a homotopy between two continuous functions, we say they are **homotopic**.

It is easy to see when $p,q$ are paths, $H:[0,1] \times [0,1] \rightarrow X_ 2$. In this context, we can say $H$ is a *2-dimensional path between paths*.

Interestingly, since product is the left adjoint of the exponential, it is basically mapping $[0,1]$ to the functional space. But if defined in that way, the definition of *continuous* is not trivial (for me). 

> $Proof$: Homotopy is an equivalent relationship (on the set of all continuous function).


> $Proof$: Concatenation and inverses respects homotopy equivalence.


> Example: $p \centerdot p^{-1}$ can be shrinked into the identity path (i.e. $\_ \mapsto p(0)$) 

Now let's focus on homotopy on path.


More definition,

> When $H : [0,1] \times [0,1] \rightarrow X$ is a homotopy (between path),
> 
> if $H(0,t) = x$ and $H(1,t) = y$ for all $t$ (i.e. for each fixed $t$, $H(\cdot, t)$ is again a path from $x$ to $y$)
> 
> then $H$ is said to be **endpoint preserving** (rel ending).

Now:
> A **path-homotopy** is an *endpoint preserving* homotopy between paths;
> 
> A **loop-homotopy** is a *path homotopy* when the path is a loop (i.e. start and end at the same point)

The terminology here is a little confusing since *path-homotopy* is a stronger notion than a homotopy between paths.

> $Proof$: Path-homotopy is again an equivalence relation; this equivalence class is called **homotopy equivalence class**.

> $Proof$: These homotopy equivalence class of loops at the same point (say $x_0$) forms a group, we call it **fundamental group**.

Another definition:

> Two spaces are **homotopy equivalent**  when 
> 
> there are continuous maps back and forth whose composites are homotopic to the identity map


> $Proof$: Homotopy equivalent spaces has isomorphic fundamental groups.


***

We seem to have enough homotopy knowledge, where we can abstract the analytic details and proceed axiomatically -- I hope one day I can introduce the concept of $\infty$-groupoid.


I may give up HoTT for a while because I am going to get a PhD and there is no programming language focus on the study of HoTT yet (more mathematical foundational focus).  The next topic should be a deep investigation of "Lecture on Curry Howard Correspondence" -- the syntacital approach (and the most tranditional approach) to the type theory. 