---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Category Theory, 1"
date:   2019-06-01 00:56:11 -0400
categories: CAT Math
---

# Notes on Category Theory, __1__.

## First Example: UMP

I will first say things abstractly because it makes things __simple__ but not necessary easy. We will need to understand the formal definition, which is the hardest thing to do:

> *Universal Mapping Property of M(A)*
> 
> There is a function $i:A \rightarrow  \vert M(A) \vert$, and given any monoid $N$ and any function $f: A \rightarrow  \vert  N  \vert$, there is a __unique__ $f'$, s.t., $\vert f' \vert  \circ i = f$ 

How to understand this? This long, abstract definition? This is actually a pretty standard math language but those 3 arrows make people confused, especially in the case that you don't have intuition about them because this is too abstract. 

From Curry-Howard-Corrsepondence, we know every proposition is actually some kind of function, by giving "a proof/an input" (phrase as 'for arbitrary'), a proposition will "spit out a proof/an output"(phrased as 'there exists'). We can use this similar "input/output" idea on the commutative diagram --

> Three nodes stand for $A,  \vert M(A) \vert ,  \vert N \vert$ respectively. Draw two normal arrows $i: A \rightarrow  \vert M(A) \vert$ and $f: A \rightarrow  \vert N \vert$, indicating the input(condition) of the proposition, then draw an arrow $\vert f' \vert :  \vert M(A) \vert  \rightarrow  \vert N \vert$ indicating the output(result) of the proposition.

You can also make a exclaim mark on $f'$ to stands for its uniqueness. This way of computation is easy and possible to memorize. 

One thing to mention, the above diagram stands for (part of) a category of __Set__. Because every arrow is labeled with a function (see that $\vert f' \vert$).

If you are not quite familar with commutative diagram, see [Barr and Well] Chapter 4. But intuitively, it is just any compotions of arrows *along two paths with the same start and end* are equal.

### Proof: Given set $A$, the UMP for $A$ is unique (up to isomorphic).

We have to show, if $M, N$ are both UMP for $A$ (with $i_M : A \rightarrow |M|, i_N : A \rightarrow |N|$), then $M \cong N$. By UMP, we know there will be two **unique** arrows $m : M \rightarrow N, n: N \rightarrow M$ s.t. $|m| \circ i_M = i_N, |n| \circ i_N = i_M$. 

What's more, if we apply the UMP property to $|M|$ and $|M|$ itself, we can conclude there is a unique arrow $k_m : M \rightarrow M$ s.t. $|k| \circ i_M = i_M$. We can judge $k_m = id_M$ by the uniqueness. Now we composite the last two equations (commutative diagram) we get from the last paragraph, $|n| \circ |m| \circ i_M = i_M$. Since $|n \circ m| = |n| \circ |m|$ (underlying functor doesn't alter the information), again by the uniqueness, we know $n \circ m = id_M$. 

By the same trick, we can argue that $m \circ n = id_N$. $\blacksquare$


If you draw the commutative diagram, you can easily see that you are composing two 'triangles' together, which will yield this tedious proof quite easily. I think the diagram is really telling you how to "compute" the proof and in that way you are more closed to the reasoning and you will not get lost in the details.

Now that we know the UMP, we can go through the proof of *monoid monomorphism are just injective monoid homomorphism*, which is at P30 of Awodey. [Barr and Well] also has a proof which doesn't require the usage of UMP and might be easier to understand.


UMP is a very important concept even though it is very elementary and cannot yet show the power and elegance of category theory . However it is the first time you actually prove something abstract nonsensely, and you can see it is really useful in the proof of the above prop. What's more, if you consider free monoid using *UMP* as definition, it is a categorical way to think than really considering free monoid to be just a list or a string or even a set with an order. This way of thinking can be more revealing. Most importantly, it is actually the first example of adjunction. If you get familar with this concept, you can remember the definition of adjunction quite easily.

## Constructions **on** Category
The constructions **on** categories include product category (objects are tuples where each element is an object of the original categories and arrows are tuples of original arrows, composition is just element-wise position-respective composition), slice category, arrow category and opposite (dual) category. These concept are all not hard to grasp and used in many places.

Product category is trivial but useful because it makes the concept of a functor automatically applicable when arity is higher or equal to 2.

Slice category and arrow category are great exercises. The arrows and objects all stand for the arrows in the original category. And once you touch the concept of natural transformation, you will realize the similarity between it and arrow category.

The most important of them all is opposite category. One example I have to mention is **Set**$^{op}$ (the dual of the category **Set**). The objects are the same, while now an arrow $f^{op}: A \rightarrow B$ actually represents the arrow $f :B \rightarrow A$ in the **Set**. In other words, an arrow $A \rightarrow B$ in **Set**$^{op}$ is actually a function from the set $B$ to the set $A$. 

This is said to be "totally formally construction" by Awodey while I don't quite agree. Because I think "totally formally" stands for "no meaning", or a situation where I write down "A" and say this A stands for nothing but only this alphabet, this literal itself. However, here, this dual category actually stands for something. It is more like an alias, or a renaming, on the original category. We just change the direction of the arrows.

Another example is when I am not comfortable with the idea of contravariant functor and always use 
