---
layout: post
title:  "Intro to Topology, Lec 2"
date:   2020-05-06 00:56:11 -0400
categories: Math
---

# UofT MAT327-Lec2
The below is an example for conditional expression.

$\begin{cases}
    \frac{x^2-x}{x},& \text{if } x\geq 1\\
    0,              & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}$

### Adminstration
1. Office hours and Tutorials start next week
2. Inquiry 
3. Check Homework link from crowdmark if you enroll late

## Review
### Topology:
Shape of figure, a structure on a set, to capture the idea of how close points are together; by defining openset; if two points in one openset then we intuitively think they are close to each other.

$\large \text{Recall: Topological Space}$
*  Let $X$ be a set. A topology on $X$ in a collection $T \subseteq P(X)$...  
1) $\emptyset, X \in T$
2) $T$ is closed under arbitrary union and finite intersections

How do we create topologies?

$\large \text{Recall: Basis}$
*  Let $X,T$ be a topological space, A **basis** $B$ for $T$ is a collection of open sets i.e. $(B \subseteq T)$ s.t. 
   *  $\forall U \in T, U = \bigcup_{i \in I}b_i$ with $b_i \in B$ 

*  If I don't have a topology then: A basis for $X$ is a collection $B$ s.t.
   * $X = \bigcup B$
   * if $b_1, b_2 \in B$, and $p \in b_1 \cap  b_2$, then 
     * there exists $b_3 \in B$ s.t. $p \in b_3 \subseteq b_1 \cap b_2$
   * **(Second Condition: The finite intersections have to be open as well)**  
   * The topology defined by a basis is $T_B = \{U \subseteq X | U = \bigcup_{j \in J}B_j, B_j \in B\}$



The two definitions are equivalent, you can prove it.

### Example: 
Let us consider $\reals ^ 2$ but without any metric on it.

We have several metrics; for example
1)  $d_E((x1,y1),(x2,y2)) = \sqrt{(x1 - x2)^2 + (y1 - y2)^2}$
2)  $d_M((x1,y1),(x2,y2)) = \max\{|x1 - x2|, |y1 - y2|\}$
3)  $d_3((x1,y1),(x3,y3)) = ((x1 - x2)^3 + (y1 - y2)^3)^{\frac{1}{3}}$

For a metric space we defined the basic sets as 
$$B_\epsilon = \{q | d(q,p) < \epsilon\}$$

1) $\reals ^ 2 = \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty B_n(0)$
2) prove intersection


$d_M((x1,y1),(x2,y2)) = \max\{ |x_1 - x_2|, |y_1- y_2| \}$

(x1, y1) = (0,0)


#### Question: 
If $B_1$ and $B_2$ are two basis for $X$, when do they generate the same topology?

$\large \text{Proposition:}$ The topology generated by $B_1$ and $B_2$ concide iff [$\forall b \in B_1$, we can write $b = \bigcup_j b_j$, for $b_j \in B_2$ ]

and vice versa.

Proof. 

Let $U \in T_{B_1}$ then by definition $U=\bigcup_{i \in I} b_i,$ $b_i \in B_1$

But by hypothesis, $b_i = \bigcup_{j \in J_i} b_j, (b_j \in B_2)$

Hence $U = \bigcup_{i \in I}\bigcup_{j \in J_i} B_j$ hence by definition of $T_{B_2}$ we have $U \in T_{B_2}$ thus $T_{B_1} \subseteq T_{B_2}$


Now Flipping 1 & 2 we get the other way around. 


