---
layout: post
title:  "Delimited Cont, Capability, Effect Handler and its Semantic"
date:   2022-08-31 00:56:11 -0400
categories: PL
---

# Delimited Cont, Capability, Effect Handler

## Delimited Cont
1. Undelimited continuation is the usual continuation we are referring to. it is a special case for delimited continuation
2. for `let/cc`
   1. small example a)`(+ 1 (let/cc k body))` will make `k` capture `(+ 1 _)` as one continuation and in the body
   2. big example b) a very large program `let ... let ... begin ... (let/cc k2 body)`
   3. for both case, once `k` capture the continuation, (a) if `k` is never called, body is run and like nothing happens; (b) if `k arg` is called, then the control is like directly exiting `let/cc` block with end result `arg` 
   4. the emphasis: this captured continuation, either `k` or `k2`, will be **from the most outside** (*program exit*) to the most inside surrounding `let/cc`, that means, once `k` or `k2` is called, the control flow is totally out -- like body is already run. This restriction of **"from the most outside"** can be relaxed 
3. Delimited Continuation is delimiting the "program range"/"program slice" for the continuation, i.e. not necessary the most outside (*program exit*)
   1. `reset ... shift ...` where the program between reset and shift is the captured continuation
   2. small example a) `(+ 1 (reset (+ 2 (shift k body))))` will make `k` capture `(+ 2 _)` as the continuation
   3. the challenge for the big example is essentially the dynamic/operational semantic, as it is not necessary clear how do we define the "program slice" in this case
   4. we need to give CESK operational semantic for delimited continuation
4. In literature, this `reset` is usually called a *prompt* or a *delimiter*.
5. There are actually another pair of "delimited control" called [`prompt`/`control`](https://cs.ru.nl/~dfrumin/notes/delim.html). There is a small difference in the reduction rule 

### More concretely, 

we have (quote from [the above](https://cs.ru.nl/~dfrumin/notes/delim.html))
> The reductions for reset/shift are as follows.

```
(reset v) -> v
(reset E[(shift k body)]) -> (reset ((λ (k) body) (λ (x) (reset E[x]))))
```

> where the evaluation context `E` does not contain reset and `x` is a free variable in E. Contrast this with the reduction rules for prompt/control

```
(prompt v) -> v
(prompt E[(control k body)]) -> (prompt ((λ (k) body) (λ (x) E[x])))
```
> As you can notice, the difference between the prompt/control reductions is that in the case when the continuation is captured, it is wrapped in an additional reset. Thus, any invocation of a bound delimited continuation k cannot escape to the outer scope.


Looking closely, this two is directly how the operational semantic for effect handler is working.

Comparing to the reduction of `let/cc`, `shift/reset` is a direct generalization

```
(let/cc k v) -> v
E₂[let/cc k E₁[k v]] -> E₂[v]  

```

## What is Capabilities 
Maybe this is a really bad question as Lau Skorstengaard mentioned in thesis
> We do not give a precise definition of the notion of a capability, but considering the above common characteristics of capabilities, we give the following characterisation: A capability is an unforgeable token of authority.

While the following paragraphs made 3 examples on memory capability, access control and object capability. To me, it is like fancy way saying "type-safe references" -- with clear distinction in runtime on which is references and which is data. 
This really makes capability a pseudo concept like object-oriented programming --- there is no precise definition but only a figurative definition. 

In this post we will only focus on effect & capabilities, though capabilities 

## Effect Handlers
We know algebraic effect itself (without handler) can be consider as the (dynamic) practice of algebraic theory, as most of the computation can be expressed by algebraic theory. But once handlers come in, the story is different

#### Original : Plotkin and Pretnar
Since Plotkin's paper is un-accessible for programmers as usual, the best replacement seems Andrej Bauer's :
An Effect System for Algebraic Effects and Handlers
Programming with algebraic effects and handlers

The idea is basically, upon the usual algebraic effect operations with STLC (where "operations calling are value" is surprisingly considered as a value), we also has a handler type, and the handler will scope the computation all the time and trigger handler at suitable places.

The problem is that, "algebraic operation calling" is a value and there is no static type-checking 

#### Tunnelled Exception/Contextual Reading of Effect Type
This alternative version is also called **lexical effect handler**. Surprisingly, this is not strictly related to **contextual reading of effect type**. The reference for this sections are:

Effects as capabilities: effect handlers and lightweight effect polymorphism
Abstraction-Safe Effect Handlers via Tunneling
Gentrification gone too far? affordable 2nd-class values for fun and (co-) effect

The main difference here from the original effect handler are that, we have/loss (the reader can check the intro of "Effects as capabilities" for details)
1. parametricity and modular reasoning is back (look like lexical scoped effect handler)
2. impure program is not able to be distinguished from pure simply from the effect/type signature
3. 2 can be considered as advantages from the other perspective since effect/monad is always contagious on the type signature, but in this style, the function using "effect" doesn't have to have be contagious to become effectful --- more reasonable way to say is the effect is abstracted away for the caller  


### Semantic : Algebra of a monad

Reference: Plotkin "Handler of Algebraic Effect"


### Denotational Implementation : Relation to Free Monad

For runnable interpretation, operational semantic might be a bit too data/inductive and not helpful for understanding the relation between implementation and (cat) semantic. Let's see in Haskell-like FP, how is effect handler implemented.

Reference:

Kiselyov, Oleg, Amr Sabry, and Cameron Swords. "Extensible effects: an alternative to monad transformers." ACM SIGPLAN Notices 48.12 (2013): 59-70.

Kiselyov, Oleg, and Hiromi Ishii. "Freer monads, more extensible effects." ACM SIGPLAN Notices 50.12 (2015): 94-105.

Kammar, Ohad, Sam Lindley, and Nicolas Oury. "Handlers in action." ACM SIGPLAN Notices 48.9 (2013): 145-158.

<!-- How is this section related to the semantic section above -->


### Shallow Handler vs. Deep Handler

Reference: 

Kammar, Ohad, Sam Lindley, and Nicolas Oury. "Handlers in action." ACM SIGPLAN Notices 48.9 (2013): 145-158.

Hillerström, Daniel, and Sam Lindley. "Shallow effect handlers." Asian Symposium on Programming Languages and Systems. Springer, Cham, 2018.


> From  "Shallow effect handlers."
> 
>  With effect handlers computations are viewed as trees. Effect handlers come
in two flavours deep and shallow. Deep handlers are defined by folds (specifically
catamorphisms [17]) over computation trees, whereas shallow handlers are defined as case-splits 

Let's instantiate this claim using free monad (AST computation tree)




