---
layout: post
title:  "Cat Logic, 1, Models things"
date:   2022-10-14 00:56:11 -0400
categories: Type-Theory Cat-Theory
---
This part is following Part 0. Part 0 is more accessible to type theory than this part because this part 1 is more about models.

Reference:
1. http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/80514-814/Awodey-Bauer-catlog(2019).pdf

We restrict our topic into Algebraic Theory first.


# Theory as Category
This has been illustrated in the [STLC + CCC Post](./2022-06-03-STLCCCC.md).




# Functorial Semantic

Lawvere suggested about the definition of semantic --- once we have a given category as syntax (say translating a theory into a category and consider it as a syntax), then we consider *a functor from this category to another* (instead of the category) as a model (truly using the codomain category as the interpretation). 

This makes sense in usual logical setting---a model is just an evaluation function. Since model is actually a **proof-relevant** concept --- two functors go to the same codomain category should be considered as two different models because they map differently. Then model homomorphism is the natural transformation between functors. This is functorial semantic.

## Model as Functors, for algebraic theory, Sec 1.1.3
But Ref 1 is not saying so, it has definition of model `Mod(T, C)` and functor as two sides, and then connect them. In other words, it wants to prove `ð“œ âˆˆ Mod(T, C) â†” M : Cð•‹ â†’ C` between models and functors, where `Cð•‹` is the syntactic category of `T`.

We recall each part of the definition:
* `T` is an algebraic theory (not yet an category)
* an *interpretation* `I` of a theory `T` in a category `C` with finite products
  *  consists of an object `I âˆˆ C` 
  *  and, for each basic operation `f` of arity `k`, a morphism `f_I : I^k â†’ I`
  *  (See! It is just an object in a category here!)
* A model `M` is just an *interpretation* respecting equational theory in `T` 
  * `Mod(T, C)` is the category of model for `T` in category `C`
    * the model homomorphism `h : M â†’ N` respects each morphism (i.e. `h âˆ˜ f_M = f_N âˆ˜ h^k`)

See, not much category is involved.
### But Why? Why define something so weird and then construct equivalence between it and functors?

Because models are not automatically(naturally) categories. Models are for interpretations, they only need to interpret each piece of syntax and no more.

# What is Classifying Category of a certain theory?
Before we introduce the definition of classifying category, we talk about its intuition


* Classifying Category is an extensional characterization 
  * (maybe) of syntactic category
* Classifying Category is something look like syntactic category, i.e. the category purely from the data of the theory
  * thus we can see how it is an extensional definition of syntax
* Classifying Category is something like the *smallest* category that contains enough information of *universal model*, or in other words, the most-straightforward attempt to make the universal model into a category
* Classifying Category is mathematically making model and model homomorphism into functor and natural transformation
  * in other words, categorify the logic (syntax and model) concretely 

## The punchline: Classifying Category `Cð•‹` is making this notion `Mod(T, C) â‰… Functor(Cð•‹, C)` precise (in 1-cell)

We can only provide a sketchy definition, or a definition scheme, that can generate different definitions for different kinds of theories

*Sketchy Definition*: A Classifying Category is a category `Cð•‹` together **with** a universal model `U` (not necessary an object in `Cð•‹`), s.t. 
1. for arbitrary category C,  `Mod(T, C) â‰… Functor(Cð•‹, C)`
   1. where `ð“œ âˆˆ Mod(T, C)` is induced by the functor `F : Functor(Cð•‹, C)` *applies* to the universal model `FU`
      1. since universal model is not an object in `C`, but a collection of data in `C`, we need to further define how functor transform a model in `Mod(T, C)` 
      2. apparently, I don't talk about what Functor between `Cð•‹` and `C` preserves in the structure
      3. `Mod(T, C)` is the category of models *in* C 
         1. but again, each model is not necessary an object of C, maybe only using data of `C`
2. for any FP-functors `F, G : Cð•‹ â†’ C` and model homomorphism `h : FU â†’ GU`, 
   1. there is a unique natural transformation `Ï‘ : F â†’ G` with `Ï‘U = h`
      1. in other words, `Mod(T, C) â‰… Functor(Cð•‹, C)` respects naturality condition (1-cell)

Apparently, the universal model is decided by `id : Functor(Cð•‹, Cð•‹)`

### That is just how Classifying Category of Algebraic Theory Defined.


### That is just how Classifying Category of Regular Logic Defined.

### This is just how Classifying Topos of Geometric Logic Defined.

# What is Lawvere Duality?
Lawvere Duality is necessary to understand the topos-logos definition.

We will illustate via the examples, and I think topos vs. logos is best to be intuitively understood as locale vs. frame

Basically locales  `X, Y` are spaces, we know a continuous map `X â†’ Y` is best encoded in the open map `O(Y) â†’ O(X)` where `O(X), O(Y)` are both frames, because the definition of a continuous map is it reflects open subset.


You can see in Sterling's Thesis Sec 2.0.9. It basically says the same thing:
> but the motivation is that a topos is not a category but rather a geometrical
object (whose constituents are some kind of points), whereas its logos is an algebraic
object that can be used to measure or detect aspects of the topos.

### [Locale](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/locale) vs. [Frame](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Stone+duality#locales_and_frames)




### [Stone space vs. Boolean Algebra](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Stone+duality#StoneSpacesAndBooleanAlgebras)
###  About Algebraic Theory