---
layout: post
title:  "Review of Algebraic Effect"
date:   2023-01-22 00:56:11 -0400
categories: PL Cat-Theory
---
References:
1. What is algebraic about algebraic effects and handlers? https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.05923 [AB]
2. The Logic and Handling of Algebraic Effects by Matija Pretnar [Pretnar]

Other references are either not tutorial/introduction friendly enough or just with weird notation. For example
3. Plotkin, Gordon, and John Power. "Semantics for algebraic operations." Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 45 (2001): 332-345. [PP]
4. Algebraic theory of type-and-effect systems by Ohad Kammar [Kammar]
***

## Algebraic Effect

1. Semantics for algebraic operations [by Plotkin + Power] gives a concise definition of algebraic operaition, which later is generalized in [Kammar] . However, in essence an algebraic operation is a family of morphism  `aₓ : (Tx)ⁿ → Tx` satisfying certain coherence condition ([PP] definition 2.1)

Intuitively, this looks ok in the PL -- `T` is a monad and effect operation is always transforming monads to monads. However, the true understanding is actually
`aₓ : (n → Tx) → Tx`. i.e. we pass operation a *continuation*, and let the effect operation decides what `n` should it be. This reading is standard and only explained in [AB] and [Pretnar].

2. What does the coherence condition mean? Why do we have the coherence condition?

3. In [AB], `op : P ~> A` is both representing `〚op〛 : P × |I|ᴬ → |I|` ([AB] P.12, Sec 1.9) and `〚op〛 : P → TA` ([Kammar] P.37 Sec 2.3 Def 2.3),  both reading make sense: the former is passing continuation and the latter is programming in monadic style. The two corresponds in ([Kammar] P.37 Thm 2.4); and using some syntax transformation, ([AB] P.19 Sec 2.2) shows how to transform these two notions.

4. How is Lawvere Theory related to algebraic operation? (I can only see [Pretnar] Sec 3.2 explained some)

5. Give me a bunch of  operation + equation, how do we know it can be an algebraic operation?

6. How can I transform back and forth from a bunch of algebraic operation (programming with effect) + equation to a monad (semantic)?

Category of sets上的做法是比较直观的，构造出term monad之后取恰当的quotient就好了 （Bauer的这篇algebraic effects tutorial (https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.05923)里有细讲）。更一般的设定下有不少经典论文，但我觉得最方便的是Marcelo Fiore 和 CK Hur的这篇 (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397508009353)里面的结果，signature和equations都用简单的几个functors来描述，并且只要求category是cocomplete，以及这几个functors preserve colimits of α-chains。非常方便

7. Why exception handler is not an algebraic operation?

8. Why CBPV? It seems like generalization of the definition of algebraic operation ([Pretnar], [Kammar]) is due to the usage of CBPV

## Effect handler