---
layout: post
title:  "Review Relative Induction Principle"
date:   2023-12-17 00:56:11 -0400
categories: Type-Theory
---

Ref
1. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.11649.pdf (Bocquet 2021)
2. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1406.3219.pdf  (Natural Model)
3. https://jozefg.github.io/papers/phd-thesis.pdf 
4. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1904.00827.pdf  
5. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.05236.pdf

***

# Internal Higher Order Model and QIIT model

* Recall : Why Representable Nat Transformation corresponds to Category with Family?

Recall definition of CwF, using (Ref 3, Def 3.4.1) : 
a CwF is the following data 
1. A category `ğ’`
2. A presheaf `Ty` over `ğ’`
3. A presheaf `Tm` over `âˆ« Ty`, i.e. a depenednet presheaf over `Ty`
4. A chosen terminal object `1 âˆˆ ğ’`
5. For each `c âˆˆ ğ’` and `A âˆˆ Ty(c)`, there exists a chosen object `d âˆˆ ğ’` equipped with 
   1. a map `p : d â†’ c` and `q âˆˆ Tm (d, A â‹… p : Ty(d))` 
   2. together with a bijection between `Hom(?, d)` and pairs `(f : ? â†’ d, M âˆˆ Tm(?, A â‹… f))`
   3. (Note : `A â‹… ?` is obviously defined)
   4. (Note : Condition 5 is basically saying, we have `? âŠ¢ (Ïƒ, t) : (Î“ â–· A)` iff we have (`? âŠ¢ Ïƒ : Î“` and `?? âŠ¢ t : A[Ïƒ]`) , in the sense that we can always add stuff into explicit substitution and remove stuff from the substitution. It was clear in QIIT formulation )

(Ref 3, Lemma 3.4.7) A category with family is precisely determined by a category `ğ’` with a
terminal object `1 âˆˆ ğ’` and a representable morphism `Ï„ : Tm â†’ Ty : PSh(ğ’)`.


basically the representable nat trans is replacing the condition 5 in the data of CwF.


* Recall : Internal Language of CwF

basically (Ref4, Remark 1) says explicitly. We just emphasize here that 
1. QIIT-judgement `T : Ty Î“` is expressed by `T âˆˆ Ty (Î“)`
2. QIIT-judgement `T : Tm Î“ A` is expressed by `T âˆˆ Tm (Î“, A)`



***
That means, for internal (higher order) model 

```
Ty : Psh(ğ’)
Tm : Ty â†’ RepPsh(ğ’)
```

corresponds to a QIIT model. This makes sense because of the above, i.e. the above two fields in `Psh(ğ’)` (with `1 âˆˆ ğ’`)
corresponds to natural model which is exactly CwF, which is exactly QIIT.

* Question: more detailedly, why `Tm : Ty â†’ RepPsh(ğ’)` is a dependent presheaf?

Basically, `Tm` as an internal hom of `Ty â†’ RepPsh(ğ’)` 
â‰… `Tm : Ty â†’ Psh(ğ’)` as an arrow 
â‰… `Tm' : Tm â†’ Ty : Psh(ğ’)` since `Psh(ğ’)` is a universe
that means `Tm' âˆˆ Psh(ğ’) / Ty` â‰… `Tm'' âˆˆ Psh(âˆ«Ty)` as a dependent presheaf

The above is the rough idea

So `(Ty : Psh(ğ’), Tm : Ty â†’ Psh(ğ’))` with local representability/rep nat transformation, indicating a rough nat model

* Question : Why Local Representable is equivalent to Representable Nat Transformation?

* Question : What is the `Î“ â–· Y|â‚“` mentioned in (Defn.1)?

I think it is just the pullback arised from Representable Nat Transformation in Ref 2. Because look at the structure
defined in the definition, everything aligns with the structure revealed in representable nat transformation.

So this `Î“ â–· Y|â‚“` comes from the representable object as the pullback from `x : yÎ“ â†’ X` and `Y : ? â†’ X`. 

So the question rolls back to -- why this object is using the notation `Î“ â–· Y|â‚“` ? I don't feel the presheaf over ğ’/Î“ is helpful.

Basically given `Î“ : ğ’`, `Y|â‚“ : âˆ€ (Î” : ğ’áµ’áµ–), ğ’(Î” â†’ Î“) â†’ Set`, we have another object `Î“ â–· Y|â‚“ âˆˆ ğ’`... Why?

* Question : Why (Ref1, 2.2) says the following higher order internal model
```
Module _ where
Ty : Psh(ğ’)
Tm : Ty â†’ Psh(ğ’) // representable here
Î   : (A : Ty) (B : Tm A â†’ Ty) â†’ Psh(ğ’) 
...
```
can be unfold to QIIT definition?

First of all, we note that Sterling's LCCC framework never claim such fact. And in fact I think this is something
only taken care of in the Adequacy paper. However, even without adequacy, we can write program in LCCC framework
and do all sorts of stuff.

That means, using higher order model, we can write program already, though currently we have zero knowledge on how to 
do induction on this stuff. 

However, in Ref 1, the original author claims **we can connect higher order model with the first order QIIT ones**.

Intuitively, we can justify how the signature of `Î ` can be written down in higher order model, 
but we need some effort to connect that with QIIT-formulation of `Î `. Similarly for `ğ”¹` type.

The reason `Î   : (A : Ty) (B : Tm A â†’ Ty) â†’ Psh(ğ’) ` is corresponding to that of QIIT-formulation, I guess is from nat model
(Ref 2, Proposition 8 & Proposition 6). They are highly similar, but I need to figure out `tm`'s meaning in our model.

What's more, as (Ref 3, P44) suggests, this way of specifying boolean type is breaking the principle of nat model (so basically it is not nat model any more).

* Question : why this boolean type is corresponding to QIIT formulation?

```
ğ”¹ : Ty
tt : Tm ğ”¹
ff : Tm ğ”¹
elimğ”¹ : (P : Tm ğ”¹ â†’ Ty) â†’ Tm (P tt) â†’ Tm (P ff) â†’ Tm ğ”¹ â†’ Tm (P b)
_ : elimB P t f tt = t
_ : elimB P t f ff = f 
```

`ğ”¹ : Ty : Psh(ğ’)` âŸº `ğ”¹ : 1 â†’ Ty : Psh(ğ’)`
âŸº `ğ”¹` is a nat transformation
â‡’ `ğ”¹(Î“) : 1(Î“) â†’ Ty (Î“) : Set`
â‡’ `ğ”¹(Î“) (âˆ—) âˆˆ Ty (Î“) : Set`
corresponds to the judgement `ğ”¹ : Ty Î“` in QIIT-formulation

`tt : Tm ğ”¹ : Psh(ğ’)` âŸº `tt : 1 â†’ Tm ğ”¹ : Psh(ğ’)`
â‡’ `tt (Î“) : 1(Î“) â†’ Tm ğ”¹ (Î“) â‰¡ Tm (Î“, ğ”¹(Î“)) : Set`
corresponds to the judgement `tt : Tm Î“ ğ”¹`

What's more, `ğ”¹ : 1 â†’ Ty : Psh(ğ’)` as a nat trans already encode the substitution lemma. 

Given `f : Î” â†’ Î“`, `_[f] = Ty f : Ty Î“ â†’ Ty Î”`, by definition of nat transformation
```
1Î“ = {âˆ—} --ğ”¹Î“--> Ty Î“
      |            |
     1(f)         Ty f
      |            |
1Î” = {âˆ—} --ğ”¹Î”--> Ty Î” 
```

Thus `(Ty f) ğ”¹Î“(âˆ—) = ğ”¹Î”(âˆ—) `, encoding the substitution lemma `ğ”¹[f] â‰¡ ğ”¹`

Similar for `tt : 1 â†’ Tm ğ”¹`

***

The above two are pretty standard. We don't have to show the other direction -- as the functoriality is just from
the substitution lemma.

`elimğ”¹` has higher order stuff `P` make things more interesting

We need to show `Tm ğ”¹ â†’ Ty` classifies `Ty (?, ğ”¹)` or `? , x : ğ”¹ âŠ¢ sth Ty`. 

```
<!-- where -->
// QIIT-style

P : Ty (Î“, ğ”¹)   t : Tm Î“ (P[id, tt])   f : Tm Î“ (P[id, ff])  cond : Tm Î“ ğ”¹
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
elimğ”¹ P t f cond : Tm Î“ (P[id, cond])
```

If we can show that, then the antecedent of the QIIT-formulation is done, but the consequent...






* Question : Why this function type is corresponding to QIIT formulation?



* Question : Can those higher order model always corresponds to QIIT formulation?

This question is a bit open-ended. And I don't think I can give a very complete satisfactory answer.

But first, to note that, it is fine to have an incomplete answer : because connectives are so limited, and most
connective (dependent product, dependent sum, etc) have been properly investigated; and if you want to 
add new connectives, just do new investigation -- between the HOAS formulation and QIIT-formulation. For trivial and
similar cases, it is likely to be trivial

Second, we can conclude QIIT/first order formulation is usally in the following style
1. no binder at all, i.e. every sequent uses the same set of context (e.g. boolean type, sigma intro, boolean intro)
2. use binder, like `Î“ âŠ¢ A type`, `Î“ , A âŠ¢ B type` (e.g. function type)
3. use binder, like `Î“ âŠ¢ A type`, `Î“ , A âŠ¢ B type` and `Î“, A âŠ¢ b : B` (e.g. function-intro)
4. 2 and 3 arbitrary combine

I think if we can show for all the above sceanrio, the corresponding HOAS is still intuitive, then we can trust
HOAS as specification pretty directly/as part of intuition.

What's more, above 2 and 3 are covered (Ref 2, Proposition 8 & Proposition 6), 
i.e. `yÎ“ â†’ (âˆ‘(A : ğ•Œ), A â†’ U)` classifies `Î“ âŠ¢ A` and ` Î“, A âŠ¢ B` 

We need to think about 4ï¼Œ i.e. if classification can be easily combined

* Question : Is derived Sort in Â§2.3 related to the binders?

****
# MultiModal

* Appendix A

* Question : Why `F* : Psh(ğ’Ÿ) â†’ Psh(ğ’)` has three defining equations? 

For `X : Psh(ğ’)`, `Ï : Î” â†’ Î“`
For `x : X Î“`, `x[Ï]X : X Î“`


For `F : ğ’ â†’ ğ’Ÿ`,
For `F* X' : Psh(ğ’)`, `Ï : Î” â†’ Î“`, `FÏ : FÎ” â†’ FÎ“`
For `x : (F* X') Î“ = X' (F Î“) `, `x[Ï](F* X') : (F* X') Î”`
`x [F Ï]X' : X' (FÎ”) = (F* X') Î”`

But
`x[Ï]X = XÏ x`
`x[Ï](F* X') = (F* X')Ï x`
`x [F Ï]X'   = X'(F Ï) x`

SO basically, for `F*` we have to define the object map (first equation),
and the functoriality on `Psh(ğ’Ÿ)` (the third equation), and 
the functoriality on `ğ’` (the second equation).

Basically because `F* X` is also a functor, so we need two equations here (first and 2nd).

* Recall how CwDRA in Ref 5

CwDRA is just a CwF `ğ’` with a functor `L : ğ’ â†’ ğ’`, s.t.
1. for `Î“ âˆˆ ğ’`, and `A âˆˆ Ty(LÎ“)`, we have `R A âˆˆ Ty Î“`, respecting substitition, i.e.
   1. `(R A)[Î³] = R (A[L Î³]) âˆˆ Ty Î”` for `Î³ : Î” â†’ Î“`
2. and a set-bijection `Tm (L Î“, A) â‰… Tm (Î“, R A)`

***
In Ref 1, Â§3.1,  for `F : ğ’ â†’ ğ’Ÿ`, `F* : Psh(ğ’Ÿ) â†’ Psh(ğ’)` and `F! : Psh(ğ’) â†’ Psh(ğ’Ÿ)`
1. `({F*} â†’ -)` and `(Î» {F*} â†’ -)` are mapping from `Psh(ğ’Ÿ)` to `Psh(ğ’)`
2. `(-{F*})`
3. The only exception is when `Aá¶œ : {F*} â†’ Psh(ğ’Ÿ)`. this actually is in the world `Psh(ğ’Ÿ)`
   1. it is better to understand `Aá¶œ : {F*} â†’ Psh(ğ’Ÿ)` as `Aá¶œ` as a dependent presheaf over `F_! sth âˆˆ Psh(ğ’Ÿ)`, 
      1. mentioned in P7, Paragraph 4 