# Category with Representable Map

Ref :
1. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1904.04097.pdf
2. https://eprints.illc.uva.nl/id/eprint/2195/1/DS-2021-09.text.pdf 

***

# Ref1, Prop 3.2
3 => 1 is trivial, because inverse of the functor `A/a â†’ ğ’®/p(a)` has already chosen the 

2 => 3:

Given 2 is the pullback. Now we need to constuct the inverse of the induced functor `A/a â†’ ğ’®/p(a)`.
We know `Aâ†’ â‰… {(x âˆˆ A,y âˆˆ ğ’®â†’) : px = cod y}` because of the pullback, 
and actually this isomorphism is above the pullback.

so we have `F : Aâ†’ â†’ {(x âˆˆ A,y âˆˆ ğ’®â†’) : px = cod y}` as an isomorphic functor such that

# What is the concrete construction of the nat model (in Uemura style)?
What are those discrete fib look like? And base category look like? For the walking type theory?

What does its category of representable map look like?

What are the difference of the above two? They should refer to the same thing? 

What does `Tm : âˆ« Ty â†’ Set â‰… Psh(ğ’)/Ty` concretely look like? And how does it concretely look like in DFib?
The usual yoneda lemma

Basically we need to connect Yoneda Lemma ~ Fibration Yoneda Lemma ~ Concrete structure of walking type theory.

The connnect to the category with representable map.


***

Now we sort out the concrete structure of Discrete Fibration version Nat Model.

# Start from walking type theory

1. `Ty : Psh(ğ’)` becomes a `âˆ« Ty â†’ ğ’` as a discrete fibration.

2. Now, `Tm : Psh(âˆ« Ty)`, according to `Psh(âˆ« Ty) â‰… Psh(ğ’)/Ty`, 
it is also `Tm âˆˆ Psh(ğ’)/Ty`, and thus `Tm : Tm' â†’ Ty`.
We need to figure out what Tm' actually is

I guess `Tm'` looks like the presheaf `âˆ‘ A : Ty, Tm (A)`, thus has a direct arrow to `Ty` as a presheaf

3. the yoneda embedding is for `I âˆˆ ğ’` is not `dom : ğ’/I â†’ ğ’`, 


***

