# Notes on Category Theory, Prologue.
This(These) note(s) mainly work(s) as a dairy on my own study of *Category Theory, 2nd Edition* (by Steve Awodey). As a CS student who is only familiar with Coq and $1^{st}$ and $2^{nd}$ of Math, it can be very hard, in a very surprising manner. Hope this note can help those who are also struggling with the abstract nonesense. I will change to *Category Theory for Computing Science* soon (after Chp.3 Duality of Awodey) because the examples require much more than he claimed and I learn CAT mainly for theoretical CS. I will also restructure the content a little, in a way that I think will be easiest to understood.

# Notes on Category Theory, 0.
## Category, isomorphism
The formal definition of a category, which you can find almost anywhere, is about objects and arrows. Awodey means, a category is a formalization (in graph-favour) with underlying meaning.
When he says __Set__ category, those objects stand for sets and those arrows stands for functions

(*recall def of a function: for each element in the domain, there exists an element in the codomain to correspond, thus codomain cannot be empty*)

Trivially, this means every category always has a meaning with it, which brings challenges for me in the understanding of the section *Construction in Category* (also the hardest part in Chp.1). 

Let's first see the definition of isomorphism __inside Category Theory__. An isomorphism of two object $A,B$ is just an __arrow__ $f:A \rightarrow B$ (not necessary function, we are talking about category theory), where there is another arrow $f' : B \rightarrow A$ s.t. $f \circ f' = id_B, f' \circ f = id_A$. This definition is quite simple, familiar (because it directly correspond the bijection in __Set__) but powerful. This stands for the "equality" in the language of category theory. Awodey claims with only the language of the category theory (arrows and objects), you cannot detect the distinction between two isomorphic objects. 

> As a side note, the only definition of equality I know is "Lebnize Equality" (two things are equal if one of the two satisfies any property the other satisfies). This is so strong and universal because this definition ranges thorough all possible theories that existed and will exist. 

Now we have the idea of "equality", we can start to define things! What I actually mean is I can define things __unique up to isomorphism__. Now we can go to see the first example introduced by Awodey, which is very hard to understood for me.

## 



