# Iris-Exploration 1

Ref : 
1. https://iris-project.org/tutorial-material.html
2. Iris from Ground Up
3. A beginner’s guide to Iris, Coq and separation logic
   1. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.12077.pdf

We will post in a question-answer form
#

1. who instantiate the bi_and and stuff below? 

In Iris.base_logic.bi, it defines uPredI : ucmra -> bi [iProp Σ := uPred (iResU E) 

2. why use separate conjunction instead of the usual one? 

one example is that, P ⊢ P ∧ P

but it is not general to have P ⊢ P ⋆ P 

because * stands for resource separation conjunction 

another example is that

once we can express (x → v): iProp

(x → v) * (x → u) ⊢ False 

(x → v) ∧ (x − u) ⊢ v = u 

this is another example of the difference between * and Ʌ 

3. Everyone is using iProp Σ := (uPred (iResUR E)),
we need to figure out how bi is implemented in this logic just like how usual logic is implemented in Set 

In *iris from ground up*, the model is quite clear, where iProp := `UPred (Res)`

where `UPred (Res)` is something like monotonic function Res → Prop and 
      `Res (iProp)` 

 so together, iProp Σ(iProp) -> Prop .

 Now, uPred (R) looks like R→ Prop

makes sense, because it is basically saying we are talking about predicate over resource

 But why Res = Σ(iProp) is a resource (algebra)?

Because higher-order ghost state

In Iris, that would be asking why (iResUR E) is resource? how is this related to heap in heap lang (Q2)? 

Res here stands for resource algebra, CMRA is just step-indexed resource algebra to solve the above domain equation 

4. and if/where CMRA is used here? 


5. How is CMRA related to bi (bunched implication?),   How is above related to sepation logic? 

 Q2: how is sep logic prop like xv, and *, is related/applied/connected to the heap of the language?

apparently this question is better answered in heap_lang 

 When is Σ used 

we do see we have a parametric Σ here, But 1. when is Σ instantiated?

1. Iris From Ground Up saying resource algebra is up to user's decision, What does that mean? does that only mean is parametric and can be chosen as wanted?

or something more?

3. I only see ghost state uses resource algebra does non-concurrent stuff need resource algebra If not, then does that mean we can ignore Σ and Iris is much more simpler to us?

I guess the answer to 3 is Yes! Hurrah!

But still, we know arbitrary Σ can be used then what is the usual Σ to use?


1. where is (hoare) triple defined?



2. Where is ↦ defined?
  
It is called mapsto in Iris